[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the US, the biggest
battle over genetically modified
organisms is happening
in California.
Voters will be deciding
whether to require labeling
of GMOs on food packaging.
Earlier today, I spoke with
Robyn O'Brien about prop 37
and the fight against
GMOs in the US.
She's a children's health
advocate and author
of The Unhealthy Truth.
So the call for labeling of
genetically modified foods
is a hot topic in
California right now.
How do you see what Europe
is doing compared to what
we're doing here in the US?
Is it that tipping point?
>> Well, I think what we're
having here in the US is really
a food awakening.
And it's largely
prompted unfortunately
by the rates of diseases that
we're seeing in our country.
You hear these stats from
the American Cancer Society
that 41% of us are expected
to get cancer in our lifetime
or that the CDC reports that one
in three Caucasian kids and one
and two minority
kids are expected
to be insulin dependent by
the time they reach adulthood.
One in three kids now has
autism, allergies, ADHD,
or asthma.
And so these conditions
and these diseases
are hammering our families.
And all of a sudden, we're
starting to pay attention
to the food we're eating.
And we're realizing we
don't know a whole lot
about how it's produced,
what the ingredients are,
how it's made.
And I think from
that food awakening,
we're starting to see this
interest in different parts.
And I think this, the sudden
awareness that, hey, we've
got these genetically engineered
ingredients in our food supply.
They were only just introduced
in the last 15 years.
Not only did I
not know about it,
but they weren't even
put on the label.
That's something that people
have a reaction that's
pretty similar to that
pink slime reaction where
you're like, wait a minute.
This isn't even
about the science.
This is simply about
putting something in my food
that I didn't know was in there.
>> Do you think that it's just
outrage that is prompting this
proposition 37 that is on the
November ballot in California?
And that is basically,
what is, is it
that cut and dry,
to label GMO foods
or to not label the foods?
>> I really do.
I think when you
look back, and you
consider some of
the conflicts we've
had around different ingredients
in the food industry,
there were concerns
around saccharin.
You think back to
the days of Tab.
Again, you think about
the conflict, for example,
around the tobacco industry.
Our grandmothers were
marketed to using doctors
in cigarette ads.
So it's not the first
time that there's
been a product that
suddenly has hit
the market that consumers
all of a sudden wake up
and say, wait a minute.
What is this?
There is evidence of harm.
There is concern.
And we simply want to know
what we're feeding our family.
Is it outrage
that's driving that?
I don't think so.
I think it may manifest
in a fear or a sadness
or an anger or an
outrage, but underlying
all of those emotions
is flat-out the love
we have for our families.
And this love we
have for our country.
Because I think when you look
at the rates of diseases, what
it's doing to our national
economy, what it's
doing to our health care system,
we have got to get this right.
>> But there was a lot
of money, big money,
that is going into
campaigning for the "no,
we don't need to
label our foods."
Who's on that side?
And who's-- is it just the
general public that is saying,
no, we want them labeled?
>> Well, it's interesting.
I served as a financial
analyst, and I
covered the food industry.
And so I look at
what the industry
is doing, what the chemical
companies are doing,
because it's the chemical
companies that genetically
engineered these seeds
so that they could
sell more of their chemicals.
That is a brilliant
business model.
And so if I were on
the board of directors
of any of those companies,
I would say, kudos.
You're doing a great job.
That's your fiduciary
duty as executives
to drive shareholder return.
So they're selling more of
their chemicals or weedkillers,
whatever it might be.
And so with industry,
with these industries that
are so incredibly powerful,
you think how powerful
the food industry is.
Everyone on the
planet has got to eat.
And so those industries
have deep pockets
that far exceed anything that
these smaller groups could
put together.
And so as executives
who are responsible
to these shareholders,
absolutely,
they're going to
pour as much money
as they need to into
battling this legislation.
And the Grocery Manufacturers
Association has come out
and said, this is our
number one priority,
to defeat the labeling.
So again, they're trying to
avoid liability on their side.
Because should these ingredients
be proven to cause harm,
if there are labels
on those products,
then there's liability,
there's accountability,
and there's traceability.
And that's what the food
industry is trying to avoid.
>> And that's what calls for
us as citizens to take action.
>> Exactly, because they're
trying to avoid those costs
on their balance sheet.
But if these ingredients are
causing harm, which right now,
we don't have those
long term studies.
No long term human
trials were ever done.
There's no free market safety
testing required by the FDA.
There are no
prenatal studies that
have been conducted,
no pediatric studies.
So we're essentially that trial.
And so by avoiding
labeling, those companies
are avoiding any liability.
But what happens is that if
there are costs associated
with these products, with
these genetically engineered
ingredients, we carry
them on our balance sheets
in the forms of
health care costs
that are associated with
food allergies, the added
cost of the grocery
store budget,
when you're dealing with
diabetes or allergies
or cancer, any of
these conditions.
And so while these
companies are doing
what's in the best interest
for their shareholders
by externalizing these
costs, often what happens
is that those costs
get put straight
on to our personal
balance sheets.
And we carry them with
these rates of disease.
>> What can we do then?
>> As consumers, as
concerned citizens,
I think probably one of the most
patriotic things that we can be
doing is really getting
involved in this food awakening.
We all have family
members that are
impacted by either food
allergies or diabetes
or cancer.
Cancer is the leading
cause of death
by disease in kids under the
age of 15 in the United States.
And so there's so
much that we can do.
We have introduced a whole
bunch of new ingredients
into our food supply in
the last 15 or 20 years.
We're the first
generation of women
to be part of that experiment
through our pregnancies.
And hearing that is so hard.
It's painful.
It hurts to hear.
But at the same time, once you
learn it, then you realize,
wow.
There's so much we can do.
We can dial back on our exposure
to some of these genetically
engineered ingredients.
We can change the way we
shop a little differently.
We're a nation of
300 million eaters.
And every time we navigate
that grocery store,
we're sending a message to
those food companies about what
we want or what we don't want.
>> What is California doing?
And do you think that the rest
of the nation will soon follow?
>> I think what's so interesting
about California is that
because there is a complete
lack of any federal legislation
around the labeling of
genetically engineered foods,
California's saying,
you know what?
The jury's still out on this.
Sure, industry funded
science says one thing,
but independent studies are
starting to say another.
And while we're
debating the science,
we simply want to give
consumers the right to know.
And so they've introduced
legislation at the state level.
A great parallel was
the seat belt laws.
There's never been a
federal seat belt law.
And so that was introduced
at the state level.
And what's interesting,
as recently as 1984,
that was the first seat
belt law in New York.
And so here's California
saying, we just
want to give consumers
the right to know.
What's interesting
to me is that they
tried to introduce
legislation that
was going to call on
the beverage industry
to label an ingredient that
also might have the potential
to cause cancer.
It was a caramel color
that Coke and Pepsi
used in their products.
And rather than go through
the labeling and all
of the liability
that it might carry,
all Pepsi and Coca-Cola
decided to do was reformulate.
And so as a result of
California's influence,
Coke and Pepsi
reformulated their products
across the country.
And I think we could see a
similar response from industry
here.
>> So definitely keeping our
eyes and ears peeled on this
issue.
Thank you so much, Robyn
O'Brien, for coming in today.
It's been a pleasure.
>> Thanks.
[MUSIC PLAYING]